## My understanding of a couple neuro subfields as I traversed through them (latest to oldest)
#### This blog has a similar flavor to [Mark Humphries' blog](https://medium.com/the-spike/the-neuroscientist-a-field-guide-ac15bb47372f)

### Computational neuroscience:
Only beginning september 2023 did I start getting serious exposure and some understanding of this field. While I am slowly transitioning into this field, I am still very firmly a naive student, so take what I say with a pinch of salt (at least as of 2024). So what is it about? Well, it seems there are at least 2 big themes: 1 is to build understanding, build _circuit/systems_ models of how neurons interact with one another, carry and pass information, cause behaviors, etc. The other is to build understanding, build _behavioral_ models of the mind, how our decisions are made, carried out, influenced by things like the environment or emotions, etc. The key requirements, it seems (though I could be wrong), is the use of mathematical models, which are like recipes for how neurons interact or decisions unfold, and the use of electrophysiological data, such as neuron spikes (electric discharges between neurons), Calcium ion discharge (which governs spikes, if they cross a certain threshold), local field potential (measure of electric discharge but from multiple neurons), etc.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Circuit models, which I am interested in at the moment, elucidate how neurons project information, from the time one sees a bouqet of flowers in the air to the time one moves the their hands to catch it; from the sensory cortex to the motor cortex. A lot of irrelevant information is filtered out, like the color of the flowers, as we make the decision to catch the bouquet. Concurrently a lot of previous, relevant information, like how to move one's hands, is filtered in. How do neurons filter such information? How do they encode the past, our memories? How does this encoding change with practice, these actions become habitual, if you religiously practise bouquet catching every morning?  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Unlike circuit models which have neurons for units, behavioral models have to content with more vague (some say more complicated) entities for units, like how 'values', 'reward sensitivity', 'risk aversion', 'routine preference', 'baseline emotionality', etc. comprise the decisions we make and the actions we take, whether in health or sickness (the field of computational psychiatry looks at how these units get distorted or distort behaviors under mental dysfunction).  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;One thing I will note about this field that struck me, was the primary use of animals, mice and monkeys as subjects. Because of ease (physical and legal) of accessing neurons and genes, there is a lot more that scientists can manipulate and test at the level of neurons and corresponding behavior. There are rare cases where we have similar access to human brains, an example being epileptic patients who have electrodes implanted for treatment purposes. From these patients, scientists are allowed to record data from individual neurons using these electrodes, much like we can do with other species.  


### Cognitive neuroscience
Ah, my comfort zone; what I have spent the most time practising. I got into cognitive neuroscience during undergrad in my senior year of undergrad, and then worked full time on it for a couple years after. Essentially, it involves (typically human) participants perform a (typically mental) task, while scientists probe or image brain activity. One of the most common tools, and the one I used, is called fMRI (functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging); though there are others like fNIRS, MEG, EEG, etc. Using fMRI involves having participants perform mental tasks as they lay still inside a brain scanner, while scientists track blood flow in the brain, which is a proxy for oxygen and energy usage by active neurons. This way, we can inspect which regions, en masse, activate and interact during different types of mental processes. I say 'en masse', because blood flow gives a very course spatial estimate: the smallest unit meaningfully detected by fMRI (called voxel, shorthand for volumetric pixel), measuring 3mm in length, comprises 1,000,000 neurons on average, each measuring 50µm in length on average.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;While fMRI is disadvantaged to probe neuronal dynamics & computation, it has the advantage of being grounded in human psychology and cognition, things we _do_ understand, at least in layman terms. For example, if we want to study brain regions involved in speech, we _know_ when someone is talking and what they are saying, and can be sure about that. Another advantage is the primary subject being human, whom we can ask to do certain things as part of the experiment (note that fMRI is non-invasive, meaning it doesnt affect the participant in any permanent way besides those with claustrophobia or other circumstantial issues). Using advanced methods, we can ask questions such as, which brain regions interact, how this interaction evolves over time, what do these regional activation tell us about constituent units like 'reward sensitivity', 'risk aversion', etc., as participants engage in mental tasks. Of course, understanding how individual neurons give rise to such en masse regional activations and cognitive processes is a whole other ball game, and extremely difficult; my guess is that computational cognitive science represents an effort to bridge these silos.  


### Psychophysics
Psychophics is one of the oldest, and in some circles, the most revered form of neuroscience and psychology. For a crude method which doesn't necessarily probe the brain, it has proved to be immensely helpful in elucidating how we think and behave, and when used in conjunction with electrophysiology or imaging tools, it can even shed light on how our brains function. The basic idea is to have participants mentally or physically engage with a task, and study their reactions. The tasks might involve perception of a stimulus, through visual, auditory, olfactory, etc. senses. They may involve mental computation and decision making, such as deciding to pick one rewarding stimulus over another neutral one. They may involve cognitive and inhibitory control, such as refraining from picking a tempting yet unrewarding stimulus. They may involve more complicated processes, like picking a stimulus which you think _another_ person might thing, or picking a stimulus that is rewarding for someone else, etc. The point is to evoke cognitive processes of interest, and then study the performance of the subjects, most commonly through the lens of accuracy and reaction time -- how good you are at picking the 'right' stimulus, or making the 'right' decision.. and how time efficient you are in doing so. There are other measures of performance, but these are the most traditional ones.  

### Behavioral neuroscience
To me, behavioral neuroscience seems like a biological version of psychophysics, where behaviors of primarily animals (because of ease of neural manipulation) are studied. We may study how animal behaviors change as a function of task demand (for e.g., when they are nudged to run), neural manipulation (editing a gene, neuron, hormone, etc.), or both. One goal is to investigate the cascade of changes that occur after manipulating a neuron (using imaging tools) all the way to a behavioral change. Similar to psychophysics, the behavioral changes studied could be those related to accuracy, reaction time, choice, etc.
